**A Theory of History and A Time-Worn Peace**

On common ground we'll build our castle walls We'll build them stone by stone, and how With more and more you know it won't take long Where it burned orange let it burn gold

I wouldn't like to learn a lesson every day Good times, bad times, it's just a price to pay But given half a chance at turning back the tide I'll stay at home and keep my boys in line

​                                       *~ Catatonia (From ‘*[*Stone by Stone*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pr9V2LGBYm4)*’)*

Let’s delve into the braided interpretation of history - the upward spiral of cyclical time and the faith in progress - linearity - that is enveloped within as it turns upwards, ever tighter to it and the truth and beauty of human intelligence; even as we occasionally drift in moments of chaos from our orbit, pulled towards the false promise of endless sleep - the *nihil*. Those of us that can’t help but explore that void, hopefully do so deliberately; that we may return to better know the whole sum of truth and beauty. You could say that time is a fabric worn by the soul; and time-worn, that soul is forever seeking solace.

*The Fourth* [*Turning*](https://www.amazon.com/Fourth-Turning-History-Americas-Rendezvous/dp/B0CLWYL4VH/ref=sr_1_1?s=hpc&sr=1-1) doesn’t examine the role technology* plays in history and specifically the technology of money. However, the rise and fall of monetary purchasing power through cycles is the driving force behind saecula - it leads to the deprecation of institutions over time and the resultant generational trauma that forces us to reexamine, reimagine and rebuild those institutions periodically. At its base, this is a ‘money problem’ rooted in history, the study of which is precisely to avoid making the same mistakes and paying the same price over and over again. It’s why Neil Howe is on Keith McCullough’s team of Macro Analysts at [HedgeEye](https://app.hedgeye.com/edge/team#neil-howe). 

Generational cycles happen because over time social complexity begins to hamper the transmission of data through organizations and thence society. Too much energy and time (which form the basis of money - for without sufficient quantity of either there is no creative outcome in a system) is lost transmitting information through ever more intermediaries that extract value as it passes through them - and these parties assume no responsibility for systemic integrity. At best agents prioritize parochial interests (whether personal, organizational or even national) not deliberately at the expense of the system as a whole perhaps, but that is the result; a prisoner's dilemma prevails and silos proliferate; systemic agents naturally assume a zero-sum pessimistic posture towards others. Lacking clarity as to the intentions of other agents, constructive collaborative behavior becomes difficult to justify and the governing authority’s ability to sustain the system diminishes. Over time systemic structural integrity begins to fail. Opportunism or at least a narrow view of ‘self-preservation’ leaves too little capital to invest in securing the system and systemically important institutions. It is no longer clear to agents where ever scarcer capital can best be applied to generate productive behavior *holistically*.  Too much capital then accumulates in too few hands that have far too few options for its productive application.

In Strauss Howe Generational theory humanistic cyclical time turns until it approaches a crisis. Once again, if I may be rude and crude about it, *“Good people create good times; Good times create bad people; and finally, bad people create bad times”* These ‘bad times’ are the point at which we begin to understand that for us to once more be creative and productive a fundamental systemic change is required. Strauss and Howe call this a ‘Fourth Turning. My own interpretation is that at this juncture, the framework for governance is well past ‘end of life’. It is mired in layers of administration, technicalities and bureaucracy. Neither the appetite for *fundamental* reform nor the emotional, intellectual or material capital is available. Instead ‘patches’ are applied as short-term salves; this comes through the insertion of ‘exceptions’ to rules applied as privilege or courtesy to allow a bare functioning of the existing architecture and towards the end even the sovereign is breaking laws or resorting to extra-legal means to assert and maintain its relevance (and at the price of its legitimacy). It is using legalisms and jargon (special purpose vehicles and counter-terrorism) to casually mask the absence of due process. It is an obvious reality to thoughtful observers; they are no longer alarmed - they are instead numb to the alarm's ever present ringing - now just a chronic case of tinnitus. At this point legitimacy is being lost by the sovereign, its sanctioned actors, and its symbols and tokens (including money) - at an accelerating rate.

An underlying theme of humanistic ‘rage against the machine’ balks at the increasing arbitrariness of the prevailing order. It tussles with it and explores avenues for opting out; while systemically important actors in turn resist. Chaos ensues - particularly as peripheral ‘insiders’ who while lacking privileged access were still not in any sense systematically disenfranchised or marginalized, are now ostracized - or they turn away from the system, its mechanisms and tokens of their own accord. Reconciliation comes through the re-emergence of a new order that applies a more objectively utilitarian framework of governance - its superiority can no longer be challenged by rhetoric lacking reason. It aligns individual interests, and in particular enables personal self-actualization to a greater degree and has an eye to the welfare of the commons to than that which preceded it. This is a normative human *preference* - one that leads to renewed creativity. The change is technocratic and data-driven - its truth now informs the new talking points (which though still barely coherent are at least moving us in the right *rhetorical* direction). Until that moment and the relief it brings, the regression, destruction and collapse that comes from a continuance of patching the old frameworks holds possible the real prospect of calamity. And long after we have safely turned the corner (as I think we have), the mass of men remain uneasy, restless and ready for ‘insurrection’.

In the centuries preceding the renaissance, institutions such as the Church and its subscribing sovereigns provided a semblance of order and structure that over time became mired in orthodox rigidity; a rent-seeking bureaucracy's diminishing utility provided if not true functionality, at least expediency for those with deep enough wallets.

The spirit of humanist rebellion is meanwhile stifled - and now in *his* name; yet who was Christ and his apostles but dissidents protesting against an ‘order’ that had incrementally fallen into a corrupted state of arbitrarily dispensed privilege and corruption? Did *he* not upturn the moneychangers' tables? This is a point in time when our faith in linear progress is tested and ultimately resolved. Before the advent of twentieth century technology and the rapid transmission of people and data globally this took longer - the ancient world was far more mobile that most of us realize but it was obviously analog and disaggregated - so it took longer (and things literally got lost and then found in translation); 

Nevertheless, the descent into disorder that followed the decay of Graeco-Roman classicism did not preclude the continued evolution of scholarship, industry, and culture elsewhere. At a point the re-admission into Europe of its own classical traditions together with new cultural artefacts (coffee and tea houses - the original ‘chatrooms’) to stimulate and gestate those traditions, in particular via Islam and China, provided a foundation for the renaissance. Ultimately the obvious objective truths refined the blunt and heavy authoritarianism of ‘Holy’ Rome order. It propelled early industrialism and a redemptive return to classicism.

Returning to the reformation and renaissance, order was re-established through the implementation of new modes (social, technological, administrative, military, political, cultural and spiritual) that again enabled objectively high-value data to flow from its sources to its intended destinations without undue exploitation or hindrance by intermediaries or power centres. At some point a consensus developed that tipped the scales from the decadence of orthodoxy applied unevenly to something else imbued with the humanism of personal interpretation or at least a discernable increment of it.

Over millennia the linear journey of social progress through the cycles of human trauma has decentralized power and authority and incrementally through the ages, more and more of us are brought into 'the fold' - one that recognizes that our ability to instrument order in human civilization must accommodate self-actualization if it is to manifest the persistent flourishing of the world beyond civilization. That is how the world operated without us and will again, if we can't make this accommodation. Increasingly, we *do* have the capacity to approach a finer balance between order and justice and do it in context and remembrance of God’s creation; those technologies are being built as I sit here and write this. 

It is our negligent forgetfulness of being and the acceptance of small creeping discrepancies that calcify over time without redress that causes our collective instrumentation to fail decisively our collective soul. It's time to attend to it - or abandon it to the organic truer creeper of greater creation. The Sun, our Galaxy and our Universe will still turn without us as it did before us.

***Technology:** I don’t have a lot of time for pedantic dialogue and royal commissions struck to define with precision such human and therefore ‘fuzzy’ ideas as technology. I define technology simply as a way of doing things in a given context. That's it. When applied by the competent it is objectively optimal, i.e. utilitarian. (A capital-intensive dairy in East Africa built in the 1970s that requires a constant source of predictable power may be modern and 'American' but it is shit technology *in context*). 