**Zero Trust: You Got The Power to Let Power Go?**

**Out of the Ether, A Holy Grail**: The manufacture of an autonomous mechanism to objectively weigh value that is organically truth and beauty to all sentient beings such that we are perpetually at balance weighing price and value: *“A medium of account, or a measuring stick which people can use to measure a* *constant* *quantity of production*”([Vitalik Buterin](https://ipfs://bafybeich5qo7pzecsojkrlgr6wcbzc4gh3gbluwrnr2wglbekihvgon7ma/), *Proof of Stake, 2022*).

The etymology of *manufacture* (the application of creative instinct to develop technology) implies that the value of the thing manufactured is *transparently* self-evident as its price:

**1. Faktura** is a term commonly used in many languages for an **invoice** or **bill**. It's a document issued by a seller to a buyer detailing the products or services provided and the amount due.

**2. Manu** in the word "manufacture" comes from the Latin word *manus* which means **"hand”** (*manus* is also Sanskrit for man) - what else on earth has two opposable thumbs and the capacity to fashion instruments to *serve* as custodians of Earth save humanity?

**3. Manufacture** refers to the **process of making products** on a large scale - the essence of *productivity*

If we live in an era of technological prowess, it stands to reason that our invoice or bill, as it were, should pay for more - not less. And yet here we are in a world where this is demonstrably not the case and I explained why in [EPU #6](https://transition-insight.com/f/money-e-pluribus-unum---6).

Essential to resolving the sclerosis that prevents high-fidelity social consensus (in either analog or digital modes) because our application of technology does not scale sufficiently beyond our immediate intimates is the question of *trust* and how it is to be restored to our institutions.

We are no longer able to automatically assign *legitimacy* to institutions - church, the organs of state, corporations and the rest, because of the broader social context in which they currently operate. This is obvious because many of the decisions they make and allow to persist even decades after later are sub-optimal and, increasingly, even absurd.

*Is there a cure among us?*

*From this processed sanity?*

*I weaken with each voice that sings*

*Now in this world of purchase*

*I'm gonna buy back memories*

*To awaken some old qualities*

​                                  ~ Collective Soul (from [*Run*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LPu8SiwjtTg))

Trust was organically managed in the small groups of our imagined prehistoric ledger discussed earlier (link) where sheer psychological and physical proximity allowed each of us to immediately *infer* (in the old fashioned sense) who to trust and hence collaborate with productively. Our inclusion within such communities was an outcome of our willingness to consistently reciprocate in meaningful relationships and over time the record of our personal history and behaviour provided a transparent ‘score’ of our integrity, authenticity, and trustworthiness to one another - memories that we seek to buy back; In a *world of purchase to awaken some old qualities* - qualities that informed our decisions about each other so that we may make better ones autonomously without ‘trusted authorities’ - and our mission now, as alluded to is now to scale that ‘architecture’’.

What prevailed back then were communities based on an anarchic and natural, but nevertheless orderly, exchange of value wherein people functioned with an innate sense of self-interest that required them to behave in ways that were beneficial to the whole; but there was at the same time no need for arbitrary uniformity that couldn't make space for the benignly idiosyncratic. Indeed, along with those who possessed qualities universally acknowledged as attractive - virtue - whose stature provided the foundation for community to flourish, it was also often the ‘quirky’ or ‘queer’ who instigated the disruption (which in any case comes in fits and starts) that propelled collective productivity. Only the outsider - the foreigner or guest (*xeno)* was instinctively denied trusted access to the ledger. Hence the paradox that there is reason *(logos)* behind instincts such as xenophobia - and therefore better to understand and harness them contextually than suppress or extinguish them entirely*.  This of course didn’t necessitate avoidance. Context mattered and at the very least the quid pro quo of atomistic transaction was beneficial to counterparties. As well, in the right context plain humanity dictated the the Samaritan's deed to the stranger in dire need. 

Over time productivity led to larger populations - tribes turned into chiefdoms and eventually, we lived in societies that extended beyond our immediate family and community and now included casual acquaintances and complete strangers. These are the modern analogues of the xenos; exchanging value (not just money but meaningful information of all kinds) now required us to delegate the governance of society (i.e. the provision of security and other foundational infrastructure) to administrators. 

As Jared Diamond relates in [Guns, Germs, And Steel](https://Guns-Germs-Steel-Fates-Societies/dp/0393354326/ref=sr_1_1?crid=17F4XR9CYPVCG&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.GQUpCoscdUO8yljPdEqDg22P8HOXl_kVp2C5SbaM1sxUV7qXysYSf2Oal338K8iCbsb5c-kYT9FfTLfsm970pN9O-YmwGHjEAOk7Vh9IM1QuWT1QgQdS7PNzHh4C5HZlvPwl8-D-4uzm0rMbjD5_4h8neDjaxQNnAqOqKQHRrtP40ENNEqgHIUuqZWS_nEO7dGFqEKLVRHgAMH4k92lMMa3LfOv0Mmo4m5SqduMgjZHQEuIi17JUl6ELTykzwiFlEh3pn5yJt91nghiRZOpXj0C96OSD4M8VLwqx7a4Wfqw.Gp_4TnLA9-7C9XkELh7OmI33zuidmN2PoqspmRyCeqM&dib_tag=se&keywords=guns+germs+and+), 

Chiefdoms were considerably larger than tribes, ranging from several thousand to several tens of thousands of people. That size created serious potential for internal conflict because, for any person living in a chiefdom, the vast majority of other people in the chiefdom were neither closely related by blood or marriage nor known by name. With the rise of chiefdoms around 7,500 years ago, people had to learn, for the first time in history, how to encounter strangers regularly without attempting to kill them.

Part of the solution to that problem was for one person, the chief, to exercise a monopoly on the right to use force. In contrast to a tribe's big-man, a chief held a recognized office, filled by hereditary right. Instead of the *decentralized anarchy* of a village meeting, the chief was a permanent *centralized authority,* made all significant decisions, and had a monopoly on critical information (my italics)

With that centralization of authority, two qualities relevant to this discussion now emerged;

- *First*, over time layer upon layer of an administrative ‘bureaucratic’ apparatus developed to manage social complexity. The once easy give and take of ‘approximate’ but objectively ethical reciprocal behaviour gave way to a codified system of rules that were applied over a realm; a transaction involving a quiet path between two parties may now demand checkpoints that add time and energy (and therefore cost) to it. At any given checkpoint, there is now an opportunity for someone vested with authority to seek rents or front-run (derive some information from you and about you which they may now use before you for gain); or alternatively if they are a friend or confederate dispense the privilege and convenience of say, bypassing the checkpoint, ‘moving things along’ to the benefit of both agents (due consideration is exchanged - at a minimum a ‘favour’).
- *Second,* society tokenized the exchange of value through the creation of money - we simply dealt with far too many counterparties to maintain a personal copy of our approximate distributed ledger (except for the occasional bar tab and such); invariably the sovereign designated a ‘token’ representing value as ‘legal tender’ to be accepted in exchange for goods and services and for the payment of taxes to fund public goods - infrastructure irrigation, roads and like as well as the salaries or tributes of the administrative class. Salt, rice, shells, glass beads, impossibly large stone rings and more have all been used - anything relatively scarce, difficult to obtain in nature and inert (i.e. doesn’t rot or can be stored for preservation against the elements). We eventually settled on gold - the stable and safe most scarce element on Earth.

Gold however has disadvantages as a medium of exchange and as a store of value; it’s expensive to safeguard and store; our solution for this was to entrust its holding to banks (and we use the word ‘bank’ to denote storage of many other valuable things - seeds, sperm, blood, genes - note again, all of these things are a product of a creative act). Banks primary function was to reallocate this capital to productive endeavour by issuing a derivative token (or a formal ledger entry representing it) as a designated by the sovereign; by and large, over the past 1,000 years that technology has been an IOU - a promissory note - otherwise known as paper money or cash.

We can march forward very quickly through time as far as banks are concerned. Beyond the introduction of double entry book keeping innovated in renaissance Italy very little has changed beyond the scale of the financial markets - the books have merely gotten larger and the relative strengths of sovereigns backing them have risen and declined with aggrandizement and profligacy of capital. The one thing that we have been unable to scale to a systemic level is the innovation of bookkeeping - one that gets us a clear handle on aggregate investment at a systemic global level. The question of how we each alone and in the aggregate fare as debtors and creditors - how we *balance* is unavailable. 

Banks naturally seek to maximize their returns on lending and make the natural assumption that not all depositors will at any given time suddenly show up demanding the withdrawal of *their* savings. On this assumption, they lend more than they have deposited. This is referred to as [fractional reserve banking](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4a/Modern_Money_Mechanics.pdf).

In the best of all worlds, this may not be a problem and in fact in the aggregate it's a clever mechanism providing a critical aspect of any functioning economy - money velocity or liquidity (something we'll cover later as we look to alternatives mechanisms for its provision). Imagine a well-run financial institution that competently assesses the risk profile of its borrowers and depositors and is able negotiate a risk-adjusted return on the capital - the rate charged to lenders and the rate offered to depositors. The assigning of perfectly bespoke rates is complex so generally they assign ratings to categories of these stakeholders. In any case this amounts to *governance* and it’s done to the extent that culture and prevailing technology is applied.

These institutions maintain a degree of confidentiality to:

- Serve their clients’ needs for privacy and security
- Secure and maintain the patronage of the best (most creditworthy clients) - at the expense of, course, of their competitors
- Protect their own reputational ‘needs’ wherever its disclosure may be materially compromising to the ‘enterprise’

Therefore it becomes harder to get a complete ‘read’ on aggregate systemic risks. The one thing we do know is that more money is lent out in the aggregate than there actually is in terms of deposits and periodically the system fails leaving the ‘lender of last resort’, the sovereign, through its taxpayer, to resolve matters by injection of hard money - at some point the hard money runs out at which point we are now debasing our currency. In the past this was done literally by debasement (adding *base* metals to the precious) or by shaving (the modern tradition of ‘reeding’ coins - serrating their edges to give them credence or credibility - show that they haven’t been shaved is a legacy). The irony is that modern coinage, where it is still used, is now generally a base metal - and where it is no longer used it’s because its face value exceeds the value of the base metal and the palaver of their very use (it’s why we no longer use pennies in Canada)**. In short the Sovereign is past the point at which it can reasonably derive what is called seigniorage - a levy from the mere issuance of currency used to fund its needs.

I wrote previously about the linear nature of the collective creative soul whose momentum ought to drive us towards a reflexively productive spiral upwards - and as some would have it, even, towards the [singularity](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/article/2024/jun/29/ray-kurzweil-google-ai-the-singularity-is-nearer). Instead what we’re contending with is a ouroboros - a snake feeding on itself - imagery used beautifully by Artemis Capital illustrating [research ](https://www.artemiscm.com/research-market-views)they do to hedge clients with their Dragon Portfolio; our ‘solution’ to problems is to throw (a lot of) money at them with little effect, or even tragically, counterproductively. I’ve seen this myself over the course of two decades working in technology. We’ll explore this next time. But for now, understand that we are in a state of *zero trust -* having lost the ability to assess the credibility not only of those we casually interact with on a daily basis but even the state and its token for exchange of value. So much so that we now even use the term zero trust as an expression of posture in the operation of information technology security - that's a problem; for all our  prowess our starting premise is trust no one. *The way the world works is broken* and the question we, including the Sovereign, need to ask, is do we have the courage to let power go and institute architecture that govern for the people, is of the people, and by the people - ones that bequeath and decentralize power *peacefully* - a true and lasting testament to the sacrifices made at Gettysburg.

*For me personally the task has been to harness and manage an opposite impulse - a profound curiosity of the 'other' perhaps derivative of a profound immersion into so many disparate contexts through life.

**The Arabian Job (or what's the opposite of 'saving face'?): A story I read in *The Economist* in 1992 (speeding my way from Osaka to Tokyo on the *Shinkansen* - you remember where you are when encountering the truly bizarre. It was a scheme cooked up by middle-eastern interests; an *enterprising* venture involving melting gold coins as the commodity value exceeded face value; it should be the other way round!