**The Way The World Works Is Broken**

*I used to roll the dice Feel the fear in my enemy's eyes Listened as the crowd would sing, "Now the old king is dead! Long live the king!" One minute I held the key Next the walls were closed on me And I discovered that my castles stand Upon pillars of salt and pillars of sand* 

~ Coldplay ([*Viva La Vida*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dvgZkm1xWPE))

I’ve taken the title of this piece from Jeff Sutherland’s book [Scrum: The Art of Doing Twice the Work in Half the Time](https://www.amazon.ca/Scrum-Doing-Twice-Work-Half/dp/038534645X/ref=sr_1_1?crid=2L1JYJOKX1WIS&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.AiSueuxLCdaVX1tfszCEFhpPvjN1uWZ-AQ5vq1pykrOoOXZynPpUNw4R16KF6yzrhEUugfN5h-Pvp3z2UQuaGmase8feG6F7RdEBh_JHqTeHB1HpVl7otpuPKU8FhUGp-VSZESaujeoRwrEH1ZcGKw.csXwBc-5zNhuRnqBWjhWyshkoclr-bXVPK0JoWYyD6U&dib_tag=se&keywords=scrum+the+art+of+doing+twice+the+work+in&qid=1728388410&sprefix=scrum+the+ar%2Caps%2C118&sr=8-1). Jeff advocates agile philosophies for delivering software - articulating with clarity and simplicity the highest objective increment of customer value and having small autonomous and empowered teams, using quality-focused (test-driven) development processes to build and deploy change that matters to the world. Teams are self-governed, self-selected and high-trust - transparency drives shared responsibility and opportunity to serve customers. Beyond the web-native magnificent seven (and assorted emulators) this isn't how software development is generally done. Spotify, Shopify, Google, Amazon, Facebook etc., were being built *ground up -* they upended incumbents who struggled with building applications that cannibalized existing business models  - so so even resisted the internet itself.

But the *real* challenge are the large legacy firms that provide our basic social utility infrastructure - in telecommunications, banking and in government. Quick to adopt twentieth century information technology, they often bootstrapped web applications that essentially provided a fascia to centralized business process and information 'centres'. (And among my first first projects was working on IBM's Host Publisher to build e-commerce sites that used screen scraped and input user information into underlying mainframe). From a macro perspective these are a challenge to secure in the a complex interdependent global economy with employees, partners, customers, and other stakeholders operating in a completely distributed environment managing access to core infrastructure and data through existing administrative mechanisms is simply unsustainably complex and does not scale in a world where maintaining constant immediate access is imperative amidst a competitive and adversarial and (in the west a culturally fraught) context; one where rights are asserted easily, obligations are only slowly acknowledged and even the 'democratic' sovereign routinely take the path of least resistance sanctioning the innocent without much afterthought to those affected or even the impact to their own legitimacy in a world where information (especially objective truth) will find currency when it 'embarrasses' the ideological state or or 'non-state' revenue maximizing a 'firm' - there's always an election on the horizon.

A general sense of opportunism, complacency, sinecurism, obstinacy, incompetence and quiet anxiety plagues this large swath of our fraudulent 'idea of western civilization' as regular chunks are occasionally reduced to sudden panic and collapse (first slowly then all at once); even saying so is condemned as insurrection and marks you out for ostracism. For our foundational security apparatus there is too an element of embattlement that derives from the regime’s instinctive paranoid bi-polar world view; the blunt instrument of sanction (official or otherwise) that catches and embitters innocents and creatives (foreign and domestic) in a net far too large is too easily accepted; the exploration of alternatives is intellectual beyond their modest capacity and always 'takes too long' for the 'leader' with a title (i.e. entitlement). Ultimately, for those agencies wielding the monopoly of force and a printer (virtual or otherwise - i.e. privileged treasury access) is the salve. 

So Jeff relates the quintessential catastrophe of this malaise: In the aftermath of 9/11 the FBI spent a futile decade on modernizing its 'computer system' - a project that cost hundreds of millions of dollars. It was meant to prevent a repeat of the World Trade Center attack. Per Jeff’s assessment, it was one of the biggest software debacles of all time. By 2010 the project was killed. Jeff relates:

*The Bureau was still filing most reports on paper in a system called the Automated Case Support system built in the 1980s. Anything an FBI agent needed to do to perform their role required the writing up and printing of documents which were then submitted up the approval chain. The process was much the same as it had been thirty years ago and many special agents didn’t use it - finding it too cumbersome in an era in which terror and crime were carried out with swift agility to lethal effect.*

At the heart of the FBI’s problems was the matter that I’ve related to throughout this series of essays - the edifice of our political economy is crumbling and we don't know it; passage of information (and ultimately *sound* capital) between the parties who need it to create a holistic view of reality and so advance security, opportunity, and global prosperity is at risk of imminent collapse. The solutions are now evident but complacency and adherence to our analogue modes of administration (always susceptible to the lobby if not naked rent-seeking) apply a profound drag.

The FBI's methods were so antiquated and porous that it was blamed in part for the Bureau’s failure to “connect the dots” that showed various Al Qaeda activists entering the country in the weeks and months before 9/11. One office was suspicious of one person. Another wondered why so many suspicious foreigners were getting flight training. Another had someone on a watch list but never told anyone else. No one in the Bureau ever put it all together.

According to the 9/11 Commission’s report analysts couldn’t access the very information they were meant to analyse and *“the poor state of the FBI’s information systems meant that such access depended in large part on an analyst’s personal relationships with individuals in the operational units of squads where the information was needed”*

These institutions (and particularly the FBI are worthy of the national myths - they have generally negotiated the balance of pluralism and security well - and certainly with less collateral (and I mean human in this context) damage than their dollar-challenged counterparts on the 'other side'.  But the vision and leadership they deserve from their leaders is in deplorably short supply and our sorry attempts to bolster them in their aim are abject and criminally negligent assertions of entitlement. There is simply no other way to put it. This is the 'hierarchy' that travel all the way down to the Scrum team public or private, foreign, domestic, hybrid, remote); and that's why in a world where I could easily drive a globally disperse team committed to delivery, Jamie and Elon wants everyone 'onsite' - they are merely circling the wagon because its the easiest way to absolutely secure privileged access to their enterprises' key infrastructure.

**The Anglo-Saxon Core's Fourth Turning**

Money doesn't come easy; I have endeavoured throughout this series of essay to express the idea that it is derived from creative behaviour. However, the USD is essentially a zero coupon bond created to generate an initial float for a global economy but the without the imposition of a real and immediate cost there is no real governance applied to its issuance save a vague and theoretical understanding that unlimited and ungoverned issuance over time undermines the dollar's status as the dominant global reserve currency. With massive demand from across the political and economic spectrum for expenditure the pressure on the Treasury to issue without restraint is enormous; and given the short-term view imposed by electoral cycles the collective impact of these pluralistic compulsions is left ungoverned and this is the crux of the clear and present danger and the warning issued by [Strauss and Howe](https://www.amazon.ca/Fourth-Turning-History-Americas-Rendezvous/dp/0767900464/ref=sr_1_2?crid=2F15Y28QY34SY&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.MjPxDMcrupx7C7esug2BPbZwjLdVEVDORG-E__lEP5ZhLCP7IZn4uo95xnxngjCalvQeWKLUlz8B8apG92_JAFmk8DIB_tclAma_z1w-R4Ja5C83fyPxsp19L4QPRZcQyp0cNIkNgruEPH-F8wlCoZ3iwekq4jMHTiUJhurKP6zbrYKnQXlI2hAfKkEyn6Xt1UB3Mp3MZf5KhcNek2UYRk4677IZTeJb6on44BhEKD7D016UMQtjeCKT-zKQPsfn4mzX_Ljt9tZrI21zLPekCnfWoyot46_X6UW8ZdjAd2U.KN77HfBmgtXcFqJU969JZN175lXVgPfmSB4yHoh_q2w&dib_tag=se&keywords=the+fourth+turning&qid=1728390584&sprefix=the+fourth+turning%2Caps%2C124&sr=8-2) in The Fourth Turning:

*AMERICA FEELS LIKE IT’S UNRAVELLING. Though we live in an era of peace and comfort we have settled into a mood of pessimism about the long-term future, fearful that our superpower nation is somehow rotting from within...*

*We perceive our civic challenge as some vast, insoluble Rubik’s Cube. Behind each problem lies another problem that must be solved first, and behind that lies yet another, and another, ad infinitum. To fix crime we have to fix the family but before we do that we have to fix welfare, and that means fixing our budget, and that means fixing our civic spirit but we can't do that without fixing moral standards, and that means fixing schools and churches, and that means fixing the inner cities, and that's impossible unless we fix crime. There's no fulcrum on which to rest a policy lever.  People of all ages sense that something huge will have to sweep Across America before Gloom can be lifted - but that's an awareness we suppress. as a nation we're in deep denial.*

**Good Times Create Bad People: The Public Suck**

<iframe class="VideoIframe__iframe___2ebvN" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/07w9K2XR3f0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="" title="Embedded Video"></iframe>

**Pillars of Salt: American Renewal Of Classical Ambitions**

On the one hand this social and technical debt weighs down the Western liberal democracies, and on the other, motivated, organized and the opponents have a ready supply of paper cash USD that too easily passes through our [mechanisms ](https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-anti-money-laundering-laws-are-outdated-regulators-are-struggling-with-how-to-modernize-them-d2304942?page=1)for managing the distribution of capital. Our technology for managing the transmission of data (which includes capital) is increasingly obsolete and costly; it traverses too many intermediate steps (checkpoints) - often manual ones. There is a pressing need to transition to an architecture that allows data (and capital) to flow with speed between people who have a legitimate right to it and need for it.

There’s an ever ready supply of experts who’ve read or watched a bit of YouTube with shrill warnings of a pyramid scheme of made up money called the Fractional Reserve system. It operates the way it does for a reason - it was optimal in the time of the telegraph and cable (and analogue wireless) but not high definition digital transmission. At the very thin end of the legacy tech stack it's literally just one step ahead of the (prehistoric science faction of the Lone Ranger's diverse and inclusive leadership in guarding stage coaches pre-Western Union). That Western Union is still a 'thing' tells you we have an 'issue' still labelled as a 'potential risk that we're monitoring' and that [suitcases of cash](https://www.wsj.com/business/airlines/heathrow-dubai-airports-billions-dirty-money-9f49cc7f) are too readily available with those who are intent on, what they see, as retribution for callous indifference of the broad brush to their plight.

My agenda here is not to delve into the challenges of fractional reserve banking, an approach to banking that has lasted the better part of 10,000 years in some shape or another - we all know we’re struggling to govern it. A zero-coupon dollar simply does not incentivize efficient and secure capital allocation and preservation as would an instrument collateralized with sovereign debt such as 1:1 US Treasury-backed stablecoins on proof of stake protocols; collateralizing the dollar imposes an autonomous governance that makes it immediately compelling as a utility that identifies optimal allocation versus aspiring [One to Zero](https://transition-insight.com/f/money---e-pluribus-unum-0) peers. This is too is money that flows swiftly from sender to receiver with vanishingly small costs between humans whose identities are verified (and therefore if necessary subject to sanction). We can use these same protocols to secure public and private domains and the initial cost of governance is easily recouped in transactional savings, adversarial and criminal action pre-empted, and of course the identification of optimal opportunity; externally and internally (however you want to define those terms) identity abstraction *is - to* paraphrase a tired and too-casual a 'tech' term *- the baby-maker app* on offer).

Romans weren't casual - at least not in the beginning - about anything, let alone something as critical to foundations as money. Their structures - were transparently sound. Ancient Rome was secured by armies paid in salt - an expensive energy-hungry currency to generate - and the word *salary* itself derives from it. An echo of this truth was called out in 1930 when Gandhi challenged the flagging global regime of the day; the non-violent assertion of a basic freedom caught the world's attention immediately. And in America with its Jeffersonian philosophical anarchism it had a ready audience. Gandhi's illegal act of defiance (Satyagraha - truth with force) was to make salt - pillars of it on the pillars of sandy beach upon which he and his followers stood. I'll repeat that so we are clear. Indians were banned from making salt from seawater by English (imperial) Law and he defied that absurdity. There is a point when those with self-evident legitimacy have to break insane laws and refuse to stand on a southern bus or fight a foreign war for domestic enemies. These are **shenanigans** - the legal and legitimate defiance of Leviathan (and Goliath - the confluent Web2 bias to digitally marketed compulsive consumption staring back at you from that one-eyed damnation of a device); it is no sign of good health to adjust to that insane 'reality'. And so, if the Republic is to be renewed, its money must exact a real price on the State - one that is sure to yield a bounty in good governance.

**The Internationalist: From One to Zero**

Peter Thiel wrote a book called [Zero to One](https://www.amazon.ca/Zero-One-Notes-Startups-Future/dp/0804139296/ref=sr_1_1?sr=8-1) detailing how creativity (an idea) combine with relentless pursuit of a mission allows one to solve real world problems through enterprise. I like Peter (and his good friend Elon Musk) and their ambition, their idealism, their work ethic and their defiance of an impotent and aimless peanut gallery of critics. I looked at Peter's ideas from a different perspective in[ an earlier essay](https://transition-insight.com/f/money---e-pluribus-unum-0) that asked you to stop at *One* and then look back at Zero because my ambition has been to outline, not a single enterprise (whether by a person, community, family, or limited liability corporation), but a foundation and platform upon which they might span; one that yokes the span of our collective creativity - a fertile platform that allows capital (intellectual and notional) to stand and flourish with poise and balance. What is the alternative? The splintered, fractured, 'pluralism' of constituencies that secure their slice but without any reference to the whole it is a deluded orgy of self-consumption; the ouroboros depicted above.

We have now the capacity, and ahead of us, the task of scaling, PoS protocols to retrofit our global 'money go round'; it provides a utility that is at once finite *at any given point in time* and yet still has the elasticity (through the provision of (more or less) liquidity as requires through via relative yield that can be express on a new form of risk-free return (staking yield) to meet the demands of the *intranational* free and pluralistic capitalism that [stand on its hands atop it](https://www.followthedetour.com/). I am an internationalist - the *World is my Country* and I openly admit to being its scoundrel and patriot. Chill Winston.

The United States does not need to succumb to the moral corruption and encyclopaedic failure of an aging (English) Pax Britannica that should have been euthanized properly long ago. Pax Americana has moral suasion even now in the pitched battles waged on streets and campuses of our continent. Nobody (except perhaps that *other* western Republic - La France) has anything like our Jacobin fury and pacifist Idealism - they were there in red and black on Las Ramblas and we are their heirs and will wage pitched battle if it comes to that. In the meantime we'll try something entirely different. The irony is that our most creative mayhem is also 'made in England'.

Our pitched battles for minds and hearts have at their heart the philosophy of 'Martin’s Long Arc and John’s Army' (they and Bobby) provided our philosophy and fell because they were insiders on left on the outside. As I myself am and that has been my own private reconciliation struggle and the one I deal with daily. I don't pretend to hold a candle to any of them but they inspire me nonetheless. There is plenty of empty rhetoric such as that which I've thrown out on these pages but now is the time for once real innovations that should be allowed to scale - a fulcrum that furnishes the American Republic with a mechanism to incentivize right action without undue onerous government. I'm not going to get dressed and behave properly until we have agreement on that.

I’m not a builder - I’m not going to muck around with smart contracts and building decentralized applications - there are far brighter people doing that already and I wrote and compile 'my best code' 25 years ago - the last thing those kids needs is Generation X writing code for them. What I have tried instead instead express the sum of my knowledge in political economy, capitalism and information technology. and so fill a breach in the 'no man's' land betwixt person, corporation and state.. It's time to turn that ‘8’ upright; we no longer have have capital - we have a cheque book. My team aren't losing 8-0 in the real world ever again - not in your house nor in ours - we won't create a fiction to make your reality; we toy with our symbols to feed our serpentine demons at our peril - and they lose their beauty. It ends one way or another - but you and I choose how. In the image above are your choices - a classical pillar to stand under and build atop (like Atlas and John Galt) or the procrastinating chaos of a 'peace in our time' and just mangled pieces where a Kibbutz once was. A modern Guernica in unfolding and voting will not be enough. Our path now is up and to the right.

The expression of a political economy worthy of our aspirations requires data-driven policy that answers problems in civil society. Metrics matter and the poor health of our commonwealth comes down to, for me at least, resolving disparities in wealth and wellbeing (the pursuit of happiness); those between the between the male and female, not through coercive redistribution but through the implementation of technologies that are intrinsically distributive to the *creative* and not the destructive. In future posts I will outline policy objectives (that riff on [Nassim Taleb](https://nassimtaleb.org/)) *via negativa;* focused on objective outcomes and consensus driven outcomes but are generally reductive in their legislative output. Generally speaking, there are a few pressure points that yield enormous returns - the first of which is scaling stablecoins. [Nic Carter](https://niccarter.info/) is right. There is a chokepoint;  an enormous amount of confluent incumbent obstinacy from those that prosper from the status quo and are fearful of the inferences that objective and transparent identity abstraction will express: what we know intuitively and anecdotally - that we do not optimally invest for productivity (quality of life for the greatest number possible) will be confirmed with the objective precision of identity abstraction; we will uncover actionable root causes. Our challenge is unfortunately is to grapple with an incumbency loathe to innovative change and to navigate the political terrain *on their terms -* with our votes and our cash - but with integrity. The conundrum that policy makers and thoughtful entrepreneurs have grappled with for decades is the discrepancy between economic growth and productivity and it comes down to our inability to show at the level of individual identity who is and who is not creatively productive in relative terms. You and I both know that we now have the true *measure* of a man; the definitive yard stick and museum metre manifested in *His* image - the bare ape who uses, but wasn't mesmerized by bare metal - the one who ate (mostly) shoots and leaves and then started building. If we are to be the change we want to see in the world then we are to take a hard look at our (black) mirror, accept that too little constructive work has been done since those fateful events of 6 January 2020, and answer our *Call to Adventure.*

In an earlier [piece ](https://transition-insight.com/f/money-e-pluribus-unum---6)I wrote that emergence from the chaos of our times requires us to reconcile our sense of linear and cyclical time; our innate sense of human optimism founded on our ability to apply our the fruit of our creative and productive intellectual capital - in order that we may restore our institutions that prosper and perish in generational cycles that have echoed through the ages. So that we may restore an objective sense of what we value, as self-actualized humans, as families, as communities and as nations that finally prosper together.

as a, Canadian and Briton, I have no vote in the coming US general election, but I am a stakeholder in our Anglo-Saxon commonwealth. With the same caveats and reservations concerning a dangerously populist tone and the resort to often simplistic rhetoric and policy (particularly protectionism) - the ones any real liberal (let alone anarchist) would have, I respectfully suggest that it is time to execute a *Fourth Turning* and begin laying a foundation for the heroes to come - your children and mine. 