**Hard Fork**

The breaking of value, which we equate in sounder and simpler times with an instinctive and intuitive sense of price, is related to breaking ethical and moral values in society and the world. As William Strauss and Neil Howe detail with contemporaneous relevance in [The Fourth Turning](https://www.amazon.ca/Fourth-Turning-History-Americas-Rendezvous/dp/0767900464/ref=sr_1_1?crid=3RGCGUILBO13X&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.79CIjHf5pO39wcJSB9OMAlvzDouK2MHGx2Z8wLWBsHT80j-NXK25yIijJdW74r2JpfZ0mLlIekmI_1fEX8RMJks6OvaCVtd6_VOAtzH10kYPfxgylmKfvmOIBDf6CAJ6HMGanAhSbHHhkLwTluZSNtbWBhCkZRKrK3PvIZ8Y0VYmsbV1Qo-LzBpaDcsxqbOZD9sGIUjH_IZOKfDMEM3pt9m-rIrR591yIjaxWzkrFFFP-ghgYp2bfDgfooPMPfNA17TW8nkgiFAYZYc_QoPHbFHdWsSRrIj5ej2m5xei_ww.7msKkHg1XTa5akIuNCsk9fzduXbwR_G-m4sgy20Hnbg&dib_tag=se&keywords=fourth+turning+book&qid=1714167203&sprefix=fourth+tu%2Caps%2C85&sr=8-1), this phenomenon resounds with rhythmic consistency through human history in a cadence defined by the natural span of human life (85 years, give or take), which remains unchanged through millennia - the saeculum. Popularized in crudely simplistic terms  ‘good people create good times, good times create bad people, bad people make bad times, bad times create good people' and so forth; Hindus will point to their Nataraj with its wheel of human creation (Vishnu) and destruction (Shiva) amidst an ever-present creation (Brahma) to express the idea.

We develop theories and models to help us understand phenomena - both in the natural and social sciences; these do not need to be scientifically accurate to be useful; the pre-Copernican cosmology is an example of a profoundly inaccurate worldview that still had practical value - the ancients navigate vast oceans with accuracy. Strauss-Howe Generational Theory is such a model in the social science. They argue that humanity has developed three ways of thinking about time: chaotic, cyclical, and linear. From *The Fourth Turning*:

*Chaotic Time*: The first dominant view, prevalent among primitive man, was a chaotic time, wherein time history had no path, and events followed one another randomly; there was no cause and effect, no distinction between correlation and causation, and *‘if cause and effect have no linkage in time, people cannot be held morally accountable for the choices. Nothing would legitimize the obligations of parents to children or neighbours to the community.*’

*Cyclical time*: originated when the Ancients first linked natural cycles of planetary events, diurnal rotations, lunar months, solar years, the zodiacal precessions with related cycles of human activity, sleeping, working, gestating birthing, planting, harvesting, hunting, feasting, cyclical time conquered chaos by repetition why the parent or hunter or farmer performing the right deed at the right moment in the Perpetual Circle much as an original god or goddess performed a similar deed during times mythical first Circle eventually great Cycles came to Mark the duration of Kingdom kingdoms and prophecies the coming of Heroes and shamans and the Aging of lives generations and civilizations cyclical time is endless it also endlessly completed and renewed propelled by labour ritual resembling the modern seasonal holidays.

*Linear time*: Time is a unique and usually progressing story with an absolute beginning and end. Thus did mankind first aspired to progress in Greco-Roman civilization, the cyclical view of time was punctuated by inklings of human improvement the Greeks sometimes hoped that Promethean reason might deliver mankind from perpetual destitution while the Romans believed that a powerful polity could endow it citizens with the Glorious destiny most important the rise and spread of the great western monotheisms inspired the hope that mankind was fated for more than just what outrageous fortune offered; the Persian, Judaic, Christian and Islamic cosmologies all embraced the radically new concept of personal and historical time as unidirectional drama time begins with a fall from grace struggles forward with an intermediate sequence of trials, failures, revelations and divine interventions and ends with redemption and re-entry into the kingdom of God.

Strauss and Howe suggest that these are distinct and separate notions of time and that cyclical time's relevance has been undermined by Judeo-Christian linearity - the travel to an end of times. My own feeling is that linearity is amounts humanity's optimistic and redemptive nature; a faith in our ability to eventually reconcile our continued existence with rest of creation not in spite of but because of our ability to wield our intelligence to creative endeavor. The 'end of times' actually promises an end to the cycles of generational trauma that peaks periodically as chaotic time and needs to reconciled with the restoration of order. There is within us the kernel of an idea - that we have the ability to build a system that at once yokes the self to the whole without requiring us to deny our innate individuality and sense of self - one in which the commons at last flourishes - A Paradise (to be) found.

All things in nature are imbued with an innate understanding of cycles (even plants ‘know’ when to seed and flower), but in ‘modern’ times (since the last ice age) as humanity began to live in a complex society and tokenized value as a technology we call *money,* it periodically lost sight of creation's cyclicality; in these interludes, we temporarily descend into chaos - a fork in the road wherein two choices are presented - order and nihilism; in these moments of chaos we lose the standard by which we measure value (and values) and enter a space of danger, anxiety, fear and depression. But also of wonder, exploration, exhilaration, adventure, risk and enormous optionality - *potential*. These are fraught moments -  navigating them as individuals requires us to rediscover the ties that bind us to others. in human history, we have until now chosen order, imposed heavy-handedly by the application of coercive power that 'breaks a few eggs to make an omelette'. I suggest that our information technology has now evolved to allow us to negotiate this fork by choosing anarchy to express order.

In chaotic times we lose our bearings - our compass spins, and we struggle to interpret our world - even our own personal identity and therefore also our sense of family and community - the things that tether us to the world. Per Strauss and Howe *'the connective tissue that binds us together'*. We face a fork in the road, epitomized by a popular meme of our time (image above); one leading to damnation, nihilism and destruction and the other to redemption found through flow - where each of us finds our gift, sets aside the judgement by and of others, and expresses it towards productive and creative endeavour, either alone or in community. Each of us again starts to produce objectively better things and rediscover our connective tissue to the whole because the collective again recognizes the value of what we have created. Then, collectively we again start to build a world that moves in the right direction.  

Only we humans can imagine counterfactuals - alternative futures - forks in a *linear* road to decide how to proceed and write the world's story. On the Planet, when you walk in a perfectly straight line (i.e. with linearity), you do come right back to where you started - home - but *reinvented.* Still, the paradox is that it requires presence - an inner *stillness* out of the mind's chaos to choose the right action (anarchy) over the wrong (nihilism); therein lies the reconciliation of cyclical, linear and chaotic time.

Strauss and Howe posit that we are in a fourth turning now. The descent from the classical Greco-Roman period into mysticism after Rome fell is an example from the past; so too is the spell between our world wars - both eras of systemic collapse and catastrophe. But our current atomic era demands that we proceed with care. The modern era also demands self-sovereignty and actualization of the individual - our struggle is that neither order nor nihilism as traditionally experienced is particularly attractive; on the one hand, there is a broad rejection of the nationalist strongman (of the patriarchy) who restores order with the heavy hand of authority who arbitrarily defines enemies - foreign and domestic. On the other hand, the nihilism of YOLO gratification has only short-term appeal for the rational among us - the sensible among us are only briefly distracted by it before we answer our call to adventure. While Strauss and Howe do not delve into the subject of tokenized money the break into the chaos of a fourth turning is rooted in the periodic failure of that technology throughout history.

What is different today is that we have emergent technology in transacting data (including money) that allows us to replace geopolitical adversarialism and the inequality of corporatism manifested by our use of information technology, which has had its chauvinistic analogs throughout history, with a collaborative alternative; it requires a deliberate decision to stake our personal futures to that of the planet by scaling the [prehistoric ledger](https://transition-insight.com/f/the-promise-of-blockchain-and-ai-the-prehistoric-ledger) with a digital version - an internet with a native *internalized* protocol for the peer-to-peer transfer of value through decentralized nodes that objectively assess the value of the data being transacted.

The irreverent fun side of me calls this a modern reconciliation of [Pinker](https://stevenpinker.com/) (Linear) and [Taleb](https://www.fooledbyrandomness.com/) (Cyclical) via [Graeber](https://davidgraeber.org/) (Chaos - interpreted as incremental right action that evolves parliamentary democracy, through paternal libertarianism, into anarchy - or Chomsky's vision of [anarcho-syndicalism](https://chomsky.info/19760725/)):

"*The advance of technology raises possibilities for self-management over a broad scale that simply didn’t exist earlier."*

It's why I have been so comprehensively [staked](https://transition-insight.com/f/a-material-disclosure---not-investment-advice) in blockchain technology these last five years - these are the technologies that he prophesied - ones that today allow verified humans to transact value with each other seamlessly without intermediation and with costs approaching zero.

In the coming sections of this series, we'll survey how the Saeculum is related to uneven and impeded implementation and the general deprecation of technology through the political economy—particularly tokenized money. We'll also delve deeper into the way that cyclical, linear and chaotic time are interlaced in the humanistic interpretation of time. Finally, we'll assess our current state of affairs - and an assessment of how they may be resolved at the (coin)base level.