Artwork: Substance (i.e. it is work - even though it doesn't look like it) and it's worth something. Goodness - it grows on trees

 

I feel so extraordinary Something's got a hold on me I get this feeling I'm in motion A sudden sense of liberty

I don't care 'cause I'm not there And I don't care if I'm here tomorrow Again and again, I've taken too much Of the things that cost you too much

I used to think that the day would never come I'd see delight in the shade of the morning sun My morning sun is the drug that brings me near To the childhood I lost, replaced by fear 

~ New Order ([True Faith](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mfI1S0PKJR8))

 

**The Problem Statement**

To be constructive and positive in the face of clear and present systemic failure is to recognize that no one is being held accountable for anything, anywhere—and that you are therefore responsible for everything within your reach: to create value, or to leave things alone and enjoy them as they are.

If you're like me, and you’ve spent your life deeply curious about how we manage and organize ourselves—as individuals, societies, even civilizations—then, once you've arranged your immediate circumstances (your own stone rose of accumulated personal *tevs* that hold you together), you can’t help but press forward. You begin to contemplate and articulate new frameworks and ideas to resolve our crisis in governance.

I believe that social credit—accrued through the generation and exchange of value in a closed-loop system (i.e., one that prevents privileged access through hegemonic mechanisms like the Cantillon effect tied to global reserve status)—offers a pathway. It’s how we scale human progress sustainably, so that we might continue, indefinitely, as a viable species.

In liberal democratic elections you're just one of 45-odd million people (or whatever) electing delegates collectively at a constituency level wherein theoretically at least, 51% of the population can secure 100% of the delegates (at least in Canadian electoral politics). Worse, in such a 'first passed the post' system with unevenly populated constituencies it's even theoretically possible to secure 100% of the seats with less than 50% of the vote. In a world in which you can define very clearly peoples' posture and in which they are increasingly amenable to coercion or payola because of circumstances because analytics can identify who and where they are, we need to start thinking about objectively identifying expertise and develop the mechanisms that bring them to the policy table for better outcomes for all.

As it stands we are expecting a lot from our delegates who are meant to represent an impossible range of views making it impossible to bold decisive action that yields high returns but always entails electoral risk. This is what fundamentally discredits our current mechanisms for political organization in even our most well-run (generally small) countries.

At at philosophical level, by taking ownership of and resolving our turmoil and setting a self-determined course, we find a calling. By first exploring as young people a broad range of possibilities mostly through exploration and introspection we find a niche within which we can excel in and accrue social credit. That credit—whether we seek it or not—puts us in the frame to bear the chalice of leadership in a particular technocratic vein with legitimacy. One analogy is the jury system except that the question is on a policy matter not a criminal proceeding.

The purpose of this piece is to explore the idea of social credit and how it ties into notional tokens (forms of money) because one way we generally assess credit and competence is accumulated wealth and how it is applied (or not) in markets to the betterment of both self and the commons. Elsewhere I present a model of how new blockchain protocols fit into the frame but here the discussion concerns social credit as a philosophical idea.

The very long view is that the right technology can help us became who we are as a species - one that shares and allocates surplus capital productively with ease. It's as though 'God' were the *good* mother who neglects us - leaves us more or less left us to our own (digital) devices to work out for ourselves how we are going to organize ourselves. God does this once in a while by manifesting a [Nomad ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strauss–Howe_generational_theory)generation that sets up change or dies trying (again this is model so you don't need to take it entirely literally.) Whether we get it right or wrong is entirely up to us. I envision a civilization that not only has enough but know what the word actually means while restoring the natural world so that we don't even call it 'natural' - we don't even draw the distinction with artificial or synthetic. This is where the heuristic of 'taste' enters the picture. If you've seen the show '[The Good Place](https://www.rottentomatoes.com/tv/good_place)' you'll notice how absurd in our world of finite resources it would be that everyone in 'Heaven get's their version of the ideal dwelling where some are compact and elegant (for the most part) while others are grandiose ornate and gilded. Sure - maybe to each their own but nobody wants to live next to a monstrous palace - and it has nothing to do with envy or resentment but rather aesthetics and provable scarcity. In the show however, people who take off their shoes and *socks* on airplanes go to hell (The Bad Place); and yet these are contradictions that we're already applying in the most prosperous corners of the world while conflict rages elsewhere and that's the point of the show. We're not ok with *either* crass materialism or social faux pas -  but one more than the other has broader implications for the commons than the other and arguably we're more tolerant of materially crass faux pas than we are faux pas that are actually cultural as we each become profoundly and diversely constituted microcosms of Venn-complex diasporas. My exploration elsewhere on the settling of equivalency is really reconciling these bizarre anomalies in our political economy. Nobody in their right minds would want to live in the good place, it's just mediocre enough to make it tolerable - calibrated to maintain the pinball machines' fix undetectable. Ted Danson's character, the fictional architect of 'the good place' designed for humanity's 'happy middle America succinctly captures the principle by placing frozen yogurt restaurants everywhere - because, according to him, we humans will spoil a good thing (ice cream) just enough so that we can have more of it. It's very hard to go back to a 9-5 after watching the show because you understand how finite your time is and how bad mediocrity is especially one that theoretically could go on forever if those longevity fixated 'chimps' have their way. All you want to do is have a good life in a sound body and hope it ends relatively soon - before humanity really goes off the deep end. Here's how to approach the good life (not the good place). 

**Social Credit: The First 5,000 Years**

If there was a single intellectual turning point for me in this millennium, it came from reading David Graeber's [*Debt: The First 5,000 Years*](https://davidgraeber.org/videos/david-graeber-debt-1st-5000-years/) in the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis. A degree of imagination and creativity is required to explore the world of our ancient ancestors. The fossil record, 'contaminated' as it is by time, doesn’t let us dial into a specific people in a specific moment the way we might wish. What it does tell us, however, is that we haven’t changed much in roughly 300,000 years in a material sense - physically and cerebrally. Common sense, conjecture, and speculation about what was plausible and probable are not only permissible—they’re necessary.

Graeber’s big idea, the one that stuck with me was this: for a very long time, there was no tokenized money at all and what was distributed as 'currency' was  **debt**—a shared, approximate consensus of how value was created and dispersed with one primary objective; to make apparent who was objectively best suited to lead (generally as well as in a given context or technical capacity). In the familial context of hunter gatherer society wealth was shared easily as it was mostly intellectual property - know how - much as it is in the political economy of our households where we feel kinship and give freely - we share when *we have the means*. Love spreads easily and naturally.

Graeber also dispenses with the popular myth that barter was a *significant* mode of exchange. His point, though he never quite put it in these terms, was this: across most of prehistory and even through civilization, more value is transacted without tokenized or real-time exchange than with it. Even today, think of the value created in the home—child-rearing, elder care, emotional labour. These aren’t transactional, but they accrue immense value across the social field, from the individual all the way through to the sovereign even though there is no due consideration; nor does there even need to be. The value is *ambient*, fluid, and flows with velocity without mechanistic governance.

While prehistoric communities encountered one another in all likelihood what they most often exchanged was intellectual property—seed or tell/tev (story, and technology). Hunter-gatherers did occasionally create surplus, but they had neither the incentive nor the infrastructure to haul it around. When so-called civilization Agriculture didn't invent food. It invented money (rice or grain). What was invented was the silo - the hoard still known as a silo is also a metaphor for isolation and separation to contain and keep capital from those who may, from an objective commons consensus perspective need it but do not, have at least in legal terms, a claim to it. Now, at the same time I don't think for a moment that humans are innately evil and the who premise of my argument hinge on them being innately good. But systemically caught in a silo, there is not real alternative but to operate within that context and work in, what is literally a very narrow frame of reference and vision, towards *self-interest -* without a clear view as to how that self-interest may be expressed in ways beneficial to the commonweal.

The wielding of self-interest will centralize capital because capital has purchase power - and in particular the privileged access to information through relationships, through the application of notional and actual capital available to those in power. This has always been the case - it's called the front-run or the inside trade. Over time the imbalance between creditors and debtors grows to unsustainable levels. Incidentally the intercedence that cause this imbalance to grow over time is precisely what proof of stake protocols aim to manage; they handle traffic through decentralized nodes with on-chain and the backstop of off-chain (discussive) governance to curtail manipulation that interferes in the parties transacting to what a consensus would consider the detriment to the network as a whole. This is why I think the scaling of stablecoins is such a big deal.

In the absence of such protocols, a regular feature of civilizations, and David touched on this frequently, was the need for periodic forgiveness called Jubilee. Unlike the bailouts that are a feature of modern liberal democracy debt forgiveness applied to all - and not just to the wealthiest institutions. To date this hasn't been 'possible' for the sovereign and so instead we have routine bailouts for power centres and the seething rising tension that culminates in episodic palace incursion (Tea Party, Occupy Wallstreet and the storming of Capitol Hill in 2021)

The systems poised to replace current centralized models, through decentralized information technology, are being adopted to enable a more holistic interpretation of data. The purpose of this piece is to convey a central idea: that these systems scale an innately human desire—not to restrict opportunity, but to expand it. They do so by aligning self-interest with the common good. This enlightenment-driven perspective defines systemic intelligence within the individual and becomes the basis for measuring quality, which in turn fosters self-esteem—and, ultimately, prestige. 

David Graeber articulating the idea of credit (or debt) as the adhesive that holds a community together. When the coincidence of wants is solved for we live in a society that has abstracted a task and the transactive value (not a bad thing in and of itself - and indeed necessarily the case as we automate the routine tasks of industry); these therefore need credible and neutral governance mechanisms.

<iframe class="VideoIframe__iframe___2ebvN" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/CZIINXhGDcs" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="" title="Embedded Video"></iframe>

**The Unpriced Value Within**

"Everyone thinks of changing the world, but no one thinks of changing himself.”

~ Tolstoy

So, setting aside transactions that occurred *between* communities for just a moment and focusing instead on the value exchanged *within* them, what do we imagine happened? I would suggest that the establishment of **social credit** which in modern terms means the price people are willing to pay to keep you as a part of their community - a price you do not dictate but is dictated to you by your community in the midst of creation. They will esteem more highly those who care for community amidst creation value -which in the abstract sense is safety and comfort. For the earliest primitive societies, being nomadic, the idea of working at necessary tasks to accumulate a surplus quantity things would have been absurd because it would have *reduced* comfort (by creating the notion we now call [loss aversion](https://thedecisionlab.com/biases/loss-aversion)). If you want to understand the root cause of much of our anxiety and worry today it is because we accumulate excess; things which we then spend our scarce time and resources safeguarding. 

Currency, in the deepest sense, is that which is *esteemed* or at least recognized as customary or culturally persistent - fad becomes trend becomes a standard and norm at which point it is has had current (flow through from the past to the present). And those who had currency—the floor of any debate—were those who visibly acted in their own interest *through* the interests of the collective. They were **vested**. They had **skin in the game**. Survival wasn’t an individual pursuit. It was collaborative performance. Everyone’s survival depended on everyone bringing their best to the game of life.

Being part of the collective didn’t dilute the self—it *proved* it. The most important quality required for this to work was transparency. You may notice that artwork for this piece (and last remember two halves of an orange. This is deliberate and its to bring to bear the story told by Fischer and Ury in [Getting To Yes](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/324551/getting-to-yes-by-roger-fisher-and-william-ury/):

*Consider the story of two sisters who were fighting over an orange. Eventually, they agreed to split it in half. One sister took her half, ate the fruit, and threw away the peel. The other sister used only the peel for baking and discarded the fruit. Had they told each other why they wanted the orange, they might have discovered that one wanted the orange for juice, and the other for the peel—and each could have had the whole of what she wanted.*

This kind of behaviour pervades so-called civil society—not only in what Americans call ‘free enterprise,’ but even in the courts, where obstacles to disclosure for the purposes of obscuring a comprehensive contextual understanding of interests to secure a fiduciary advantage at the expense of sound jurisprudence are upheld. Under the dollar regime, every opportunity is exploited to gain and maintain leverage over others—who are viewed as adversaries first, and partners second. We’ve gone so far that even open-source code is now deliberately bloated or altered in ways that circumvent optimal use with extraneous elements or alterations merely to assert a proprietary [claim](https://www.wired.com/1998/09/sun-microsoft-take-it-to-court/) or adversarial advantage. What if we could offer surplus with transparency instead? Might not discover markets for [the peel and the 'gold' man](https://transition-insight.com/transition-insight/f/from-london-yes-both-and-toronto?blogcategory=Brevis+(Dropping+Briefs)) finds within the orange instead of splitting differences that are incomplete, incompatible superficially and ultimately systemically sub-optimal.

The other point I want to make with the art is that your *Calling* is the niche that the commons needs you discover and then fill a holistic need - that only *you* can. Whatever that niche happens to be.

When we do imagine the scenarios wherein groups interacted how would they have done so? By fronting their leadership - the ones who had the courage to ideate, create and share were the ones also burdened with the task of managing the most fraught situations of all. What we have to understand most of all is that true leadership is genuinely reluctant - it is offered because a solution is not present. One does not vie, particularly with nonsensical and inherently flawed ideas for the mantle of leadership simply because they are the best ones possible under the current circumstances given the distribution of consensus opinion (because we ask every idiot whose vote is up for grabs to the highest bidder). This is true in the real world that we live in the - the most intelligent and ethical and self-interested people will live life on their own terms and that will most certainly not involve taking leadership positions in electoral affairs - there simply isn't enough scope for someone to make a positive impact because of the trade-offs required and the destructive dispiriting to (preferably by borrowing it from the library). Or you could just take the general idea and apply it thoroughly - satyagraha (self-reliance): neither want nor need nothing from anyone. Then give yourself thoroughly by expressing your calling. 

For any tradition mode of charity (donating to food banks, donating blood, giving to charities or churches I can give you legitimate reasons why they are objectively speaking sub-optimal approaches in our liberal democratic framework for manifesting change. And yet, if you find like-minded community to solve a problem in your immediate vicinity - the plight of a local family or the state of a common open area - that's one where an anarchist would look to versus subscribing to a industrial charity. I'm not interested in changing the minds of people who have discovered and know that this is what they must do - they are more than welcome to take that route. There are many paths to solving our problems and I encourage people who disagree with mine to find and apply their approaches. That is a free market of ideas being expressed.

The world of my imagination is one where we've raised communities that maximize an individual's potential for self-expression, self-reliance; people with a deliberately long-term view of what they and their bodies and minds will look like five, ten, fifteen, twenty years from now so that we have the material wherewithal to actually care for those that truly need us to carry them; because capital in a real world is every bit as scarce as this planet. Only anarchists really seem to appreciate this and demand that entrenched monied interests who time and time again are bailed out and whose 'enterprises' are given a free-ride through the dollar regimes monetary, fiscal and regulatory frameworks are held accountable.

**Victory is Objective Success**

Throughout my own life I've ran an idealistic philosopher king scenario. Let me 'buy' and run a kingdom as I would see fit. I bought two acres northwest of Toronto. Replaced a quarter of it with native wildflower and planted some two hundred trees all native (birch, sugar maple, silver maple, white oak, pin oak etc). I installed a heat-pump with to reduce emissions, put up solar panels and essentially the home produced it's own heating, cooling and power. Our septic system holds, filter and seeps into the fine fescue deep rooted grass I planted in our lawn and over twenty five years not so much as a single ounce of organic kitchen waste has left the property. As much as possible we tried to create a closed loop; take care of a matter so that in my not become fodder for NIMBYism elsewhere. 

I've applied the same principles to my own development. Assuming fitness protocols in turn to solve specific conditions in my physicality or to learn valuable skills (fighting, managing speed). The same with my mental acuity (improvisation, deep introspection and expression of complex ideas). As I get to the stage in life where I no longer need to manage a family, the idea of minimalism and ascetism have an allure. So too the beautiful vision of ranging to connect with like minded people while creating content that pleases and satisfies my tastes not those of others simply because I trust and value my ideas more than I do those of others. In a sense that is mentality that you need to bring - with objectivity and credibility. Trust yourself and fail then repeat.

**Buy In**

Again Maximal Extractable Value (MEV) happens through the manipulation of your behaviour when you are susceptible and amenable to compliance - generally through the triggering of impulses (guilt, shame or a sense of being incomplete or inadequate). Thinking creatively with reason and intuition and using the tools at your disposal you can create alternative modalities that work in your self-interest materially and notionally while advancing the interests of the commons.

[Imprimatur (Tout Suite)](https://transition-insight.com/?blogcategory=Imprimatur+(Tout+Suite)) is a collection (i.e. a *suite*) of simple ways that I express personal agency with immediacy - they have everything to do with my personal ecology and political economy. I'll tout what works for me. Do the same.

Here's Noam Chomsky on participatory democracy. In real terms that has nothing to do with voting and everything to do with reclaiming self-sovereignty and agency by making consequential positive decisions on how to live your life.

<iframe class="VideoIframe__iframe___2ebvN" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Oh_Zk6Da9fU" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="" title="Embedded Video"></iframe>