---
layout: "base.njk"
title: "Self-Sovereign"
date: "2025-09-14"
tags: ["Peridot"]

---





**Artwork**: Black Wholesome: *Ideally* looking out at a black 'whole' and having found calling, one finds their place amidst a greater whole.

 

Stuttering Cold and damp Steal the warm wind, tired friend Times are gone For honest men Sometimes, far too long for snakes In my shoes Walking sleep In my youth, I pray to keep Heaven send Hell away No one sings like you anymore 

~ Soundgarden ([Black Hole Sun](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3mbBbFH9fAg))

**Self-Sovereignty**

See thou be not *Caesarified,* nor take that dye, for there is the possibility. So keep thyself a simple and good man, uncorrupt, dignified, plain, a friend of justice, god-fearing, gracious, affectionate, manful in doing thy duty. Strive to be always such as Philosophy minded to make thee. Revere the Gods, save mankind. Life is short. This only is the harvest of earthly existence, a righteous disposition and social acts.

~ Marcus Aurelius Book VII - 30

What is it to be self-sovereign (*not* Caesarified) from my own anarchist perspective? Because *times are gone for honest men* I do not defer to rank, privilege or status that isn't self-evidently legitimate (i.e. reflects the quality and character of the individual holding it). I approach whoever is in front of me with reason, intuition and with a degree of openness as to the opportunities afforded to create value together in partnership or community. There are implications therefore concerning what implies a 'partnership' or a 'community'; it can only include so many people before one can no longer reasonably and intuitively assess for trust. So a corollary to my non-deference to rank, privilege or status is that all formal institutions have lost legitimacy - most of all the Sovereign and in particular the Hegemon. So how does one live realistically - by dealing with each human as a unique entity relating with reason and intuition to seek equivalence (colloquially 'different but same'). That is how an anarchist lives with contentment.

How do I come to say that *all formal institutions* have lost legitimacy in my eyes? Institutions exist within spheres that provide governance through contracts which are enforced in our political economy including the laws of our nation-states. I can't speak for any countries except mine - those of which I am a national (the United Kingdom and Canada). Both countries admit to contracts with the Hegemon (the United States - *de facto* and *de jure* leader of the US dollar regime in which my countries exist. All contracts involve an exchange of due consideration - notably that exchange is measured in US Dollars. Let's take a look at US contract in two matter-of-fact of ways.

One important contract to which both my countries are parties is the North Atlantic Treaty Organization - the Treaty is the Contract. Another rather more complex one is the [United States Dollar](https://www.google.com/search?q=United+States+dollar+is+a+contract—both+implicitly+and+explicitly&oq=United+States+dollar+is+a+contract—both+implicitly+and+explicitly&gs_lcrp=EgZjaHJvbWUyBggAEEUYQDIGCAEQLhhA0gEJMTA3MGowajE1qAIAsAIA&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8) itself

Beyond the terms of the terms of a contract itself is the spirit and tradition with which it is both written and interpreted. Let's examine how the de facto and de jure leader of the US dollar regime interprets those two contracts:

1. NATO: The United States has floated ideas, in spite of clear indications both by governing bodies and by the people themselves, an intent to absorb both Canada and Greenland (a territory under the protection of Denmark). This amounts undermining both countries' sovereignty and a transgression of NATO's terms (at least in spirit).*
2. USD:  Under President Richard Nixon, amid a crisis of legitimacy driven by escalating costs in blood and treasure, the United States unilaterally ended the dollar’s convertibility to gold, dismantling the Bretton Woods system. Known as the **Nixon Shock**, this move ended the fixed $35 per ounce gold exchange established in 1944, effectively killing the gold standard and ushering in the modern fiat system. The spot price as of writing is $3,108.01. While the U.S. cited inflation, trade imbalances, and speculative attacks as justification, the shift ultimately preserved its monetary dominance by allowing the dollar to float freely. 

 

The upshot is this: My own home nations — England and Canada — cannot reasonably be expected to protect me from the actions of an imperial hegemon (nor do they. In fact it will be in their interests or at least it is the path of least resistance to yield to hegemonic pressure (and that has been my own [experience](https://transition-insight.com/transition-insight/f/maplehurst-moksha-liberation?blogcategory=Daily+Planet+(The+Star))). So I can expect at best disinterest (and not even neutrality) from even my very own sovereigns and in all likelihood a bit of hazing. Nor can I place trust in any formal institution operating under the dollar regime, whether sovereign, corporate, or private. As a result, all such institutions and contracts have, in my own eyes, decisively lost legitimacy in practical terms.

That said, in law (de jure), the situation is different: I continue to obey the laws of my own countries and, should I ever find myself within the jurisdiction of the hegemon, I will of course observe all required courtesies.

It goes without saying that I do not hold fiat currency of any kind. I choose to hold values-driven proof-of-stake tokens and will do so at any USD price indefinitely. I would sooner have my home - property'** foreclosed than concede moral authority to a regime that sanctifies deception. 

Now, it's important to make the distinction between a deeply-held personal narrative and the one offered to the world where a *different* consensus prevails. I still use the sovereign's money - and even accept it as due consideration where it is offered - there is no alternative. There is no inconsistency here; merely a pragmatic acknowledgement of a social construct that currently has wider acceptance. There are many who make the same concession without complaint - much like a poor refereeing decision which we have no means to contest.

**Opportunity: It Smells Like (Their Bullshit) Money**

<iframe class="VideoIframe__iframe___2ebvN" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/v_DQtUK-FXg" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="" title="Embedded Video"></iframe>

(So don't waste your time worrying about 'your' jobs and houses - because you and those things belong to them - until you own yourself)

**Bitcoin**

Several failures in finance have followed the Nixon Shock—most notably in 1987 and 2008. The emergence of the internet allowed for decentralized assessment and consensus on what constituted fair value for things. A simple example of this is Google’s ability to express trends along an axis. By examining data comprehensively, one can map anything to an axis, set relative value, and, by extension, derive an objective price.

In 2008, we saw in stark detail how the dollar was no longer a valid, decentralized (i.e., broadly accepted) measure of value. The result of this shift was Bitcoin. It’s not nothing. For a long time, and to some extent still today, Bitcoin represents price—though whether this relative valuation is driven by correlative or causative factors isn't always obvious, and at times, it may even be influenced by obscure or random elements in any given instance. This complexity is where I begin to draw conclusions about its true utility.

The incongruous can be obscured and upon discovery is deemed to be in absurdly bad taste except to the psychopath. We can deliver capital to those in need to fund education as teachers with curriculum; or send it in the form of munitions delivered by heavy artillery perhaps even funded by a hegemonic sponsor. Perhaps Amazon could deliver bitcoin pizzas for lunch following the sortie. Now that is 'http://www.relentless.com'.  In either case objectively we are 'spending money on children' and 'late term birth control (for the people who authority deems 'need it' - no need for condoms in their schools' (better late than never). If there are any survivors, you might even fund circumcisions without bias as to gender (just to illustrate your pluralism).The latter gives you 'two for one' - what a great deal?' says the ambitious and frugal hegemonic politician looking to trend with a blend. Moreover I'm being conservative and progressive simultaneously - even both aisles will be happy (at least their octogenarian giants).* Our polling data should start to look *good*. Bad taste is a heuristic that divines the truth to see that which is not beauty. Some things ought to indefensible to a human - even ones in authority at the hegemonic core. Now *that* is a '*ground game*'.  As I said - they have lost legitimacy and profoundly so - at least in my eyes. Being all things to all people at all times is what your political economy endeavours to do. Everything for everyone right now. There are two ways to go about this - with or without 0-Layer governance that seeks equivalence through reason and intuitive empathy. One thing has genuine yield in contentment and basic comfort while the other makes you all things to all people in democracy's opinion; hard pass for me - thanks but no thanks. War crime? We complicate matters: War *is* crime by extension so are all sovereigns and institutions formally in their realm of governance. Bitcoin, once a useful proof of concept, is now, to steal a term from economics, a 'dead weightless loss' - Less than 0. It is possessed of the unbearable lightness of being less than nothing. 

I hold some things dear that have no value to others, and vice versa. Hence, the need for a yield-bearing token with zero-layer governance as an arbiter of contextual value that possesses legitimate commons consensus. When we tokenize assets including fiat, that yield (above the cost of governance) will allow price to be set objectively. Remembering that Bitcoin is infinitely divisible tokens not in circulation do not affect the relative valuation of things - only price in fiat terms - and therefore have no marginal utility. 

At the time of writing, Bitcoin is valued at USD $82,787.96, and its appreciation serves as a measure of how much legitimacy the dollar has lost globally in my opinion. It is not digital gold (which possesses yield as an industrial commodity). Rather, it acts as a zero-trust and coupon bond proxy for the United States dollar. I have no use for Bitcoin, primarily because it lacks staking yield and carries significant negative externalities, particularly in terms of its environmental cost and the price of energy. Christ is King—not cash. Consequently, I hold no material quantity of Bitcoin in my account (CAD $7.06 at the time of writing - too small an amount to sell - consider it the amount that is no longer 'legal tender' - bitcoin while not tender to the touch does pack quite a punch). Now, if you told me criminals (those are people who commit crimes - such as assault) stash and use bitcoin cache as cash, I'd dump whatever I had. So should you if you had any sense. Cents have nothing to do it with (metric has a finite standard 0-1 - following zeroes follow are superfluous where capital is concerned). Remember this much: Not my keys, not my wallet, not my money. You can do with whatever you want with bitcoin in your possession (which we all know is 100% of the law when it comes to lawless money). To be transparent - with bitcoin you can buy anything you want: Your heart's desire if you will (diamonds, spades, hearts even - but you'll never buy club or country - not mine at any rate).

*An alternative anarchic approach to conflict resolution between allies (fancy a drink then?): Canada and Denmark have a long-standing but *good-natured* territorial dispute over **Hans Island**, a small, uninhabited rock in the Arctic. For decades, both countries engaged in the **"Whisky War"**, where Canadian and Danish officials would visit the island, plant their respective flags, and leave behind bottles of whisky (Canadian whisky) or schnapps (Danish liquor) as a friendly gesture. In 2022, Canada and Denmark finally settled the dispute by agreeing to split the island, officially drawing a boundary through it—making it the first land border between Canada and Denmark (via Greenland). Most people have never heard of the dispute and there is a general lack of bombast as these matters are settled internally (and transparently) within governance frameworks.

**Property: An arbitrary and imaginary demarcation priced and transferred in mediums of exchange that have no legitimacy and provide no meaningful title to anyone in any reasonable sense. In North America, particular the history of treaty failures relating to land is a long one going back to the founding of the modern states. So I should not be too complacent when the hegemon begins to communicate its imperial designs. Those with their feet on firm ground know and are grateful that *they belong to it*. Regardless, we'll work with the alternative narrative until confiscations for the newly indigenous Indian begins - a Godless pagan European one at that. That should really rock the polling number: I'm an Aryan, I'm a legal Aryan, I'm an Englishman in new York (Toronto). The most successful Viking Indian Anglo-Saxon with African parents. It may even begin to look like the British Empire is projecting its glorious invisible future. Rule Britannia.

**Hour Nature**

Now, all of this paints a negative picture and nature abhors a vacuum which is why we look at this as an opportunity. It will suck the life out of you if you're not geared to self-actualize creatively towards your calling and you cannot assume the commons or the sovereign will make 'reality' amenable - and increasingly it cannot.

So the need is to turn inwards to find calling through addressing the dualism between the self and the commons and find an angle to serve those commons regardless while we do what we can to make ourselves as self-sufficient as possible (*satyagraha*). We are in a hurry and too quick to jump to our institutions - either to fix them or to look to them for fixes when they really begin with the self. Looking at the world with detachment, equanimity and without judgement is to acknowledge the selfish and to even see the 'good in greed' by turning back upon ourselves first and to hoard that one scarce commodity: time - to use it to serve ourselves well taking from the commons as little as possible; we'll examine that in part two of this illumination as it ties into how we distill our collective best self to create Our Glass - the compact dial or sphere of the natural world of planets and stars manifested on earth in governance that do in fact need no apparent architect - as though they *self-govern* in the cosmic dance of the Bhagavad Gita (A Song Celestial) to yoke us without coercion in Anarchy.

We're not turning away decisively from institutions and people in society - that's not really possible without going '[Christopher McCandless](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_McCandless)'. Rather, as we work within civil society, do not take sympathy for our purpose for granted - particularly in conventional corporation institutions where many people are 'profoundly checked-out' having been denied the most ordinary duty of care. Ethics are no longer a consideration - institutions have their work cut out just adhering to the bare (and outdated) regulatory frameworks for workplace safety; secrecy and a general intransigent lack of transparency is coloured as confidentiality and fiduciary obligations to stakeholders. Our response as anarchist is to double-down on our commitment to restore the commons to sound governance through radical self-sovereignty - own yourself before they do - and then projecting a vision outward.

*I have a lot of time for small liberal democracies in difficult places and when you see how a hegemon behaves with stalwart allies you know how little optionality they have and how little they can rely on their 'patron' so I refrain from casting judgement. Anyone with eyes can see who is guilty of commission and/or omission as they see fit depending on the election cycle and the composition of their electoral base. This is about scaling kibbutzim not dismantling their inhabitants. The failure of western democracy's legitimacy lies with the hegemon whose leaders ever more appear to stake with party or some faction within it rather than their country; and where neither faction, nor party nor country works for the planet.

Dedication: For [Noam Chomsky](https://chomsky.info/) - that such a one could ever exist gives one faith that God too exists even if humanity is still only just a 'good idea'. Until then, *Homo Electus* you're just another animal - and not even particularly good at *aping* your closest relative, or for that matter ancestor. Your weights and measures amount to scales on the Ouroboros.

~ Ashit Milne (Planet Come Together)